A fractured United States is at
war with itself.
That's the premise of Alex Garland's Civil War, number one at
the US box office.
A bit weird, considering
its unusual heroes.
War photographers, someone said,
don't make it about journalists.
Everybody hates journalists. Now.
Journalism can't end the civil war,
but if it fails, the movie seems
to say one is more likely to start.
We don't ask. We record,
so other people ask.
It's an imaginary scenario,
but it looks disturbingly real.
So I talked about it with
some of today's most important
war photographers, incredible people
who filmed real wars,
assassinations and genocides
that have been shot,
bombed, kidnapped.
That's coming from someone who's
been kidnapped twice.
I was not able to stop
people from being executed.
Some of them are risking
their lives right now.
So how does their job actually
look like?
And how accurate is the movie?
Just a quick warning, we are going
to discuss details from the movie,
so expect spoilers.
And we're also going
to look at war photos, so expect
images of violence.
So did you like the movie? Yeah,
I like the movie.
Powerful and unsettling.
Kirsten Dunst did an incredible job.
One of the things
that was so realistic about
the film were these summerly
executions that happened
so fast with no conversation.
The relationship between
the more experienced photographer
and the younger photographer,
the fragility of life and how people
can go from living
to dead in seconds.
The monotony of sort of driving
through a war zone you're planning
with your fixer or the reporter
you happen to be working with.
Any anyone of your team, a driver.
Everything is more intense and
so relationships evolve
at a faster rate.
Having been a photographer working
on January 6, being inside
the Capitol, there's some remnants
and and some similarities.
They got a lot right,
and that's more than most films do
when it comes to photojournalists.
There were some certain things
that did not make sense.
We're talking about Hollywood,
right? We're talking about
very violent film.
It's not that realistic
that journalists are given
that front row seat to violence right
off the bat.
There are times when we're wearing
flak jackets and helmets.
Other times we're not without
any kind of rhyme or reason.
She has her sort of breakdown at
the end of the movie while she's
still on assignment.
I don't think that's
when you would fall apart as a very
experienced war photographer.
I think that that would obviously
happen during the quiet moments
back at home.
The fact that there was number
medical kit, there was number effort
to even stop the bleeding.
They didn't really give
the characters time.
To converse with civilians.
But one of the biggest things, of
course, is that if there's
a siege on the White House,
that there are only four or five
journalists there.
In today's day and age with
everybody that has a phone,
everybody that has a camera seems
literally impossible.
OK, now let's zoom in on five
scenes of the movie from beginning
to end so I can ask you how realistic
they are and use them to talk about
war photography in general.
We are towards
the beginning of the movie and Lee
the experienced journalist meets for
the first time Jesse, the aspiring
photographer and saves our life from
a suicide bombing.
Unfortunately I cannot show
the next part of the clip because
it's not in the promotional material.
We'll have to get ingenious with
the whole video in that sense,
but I have a picture right here and
I'll send it to you as well.
But in any case.
Immediately after the bomb went off.
While this is still shocked,
Lee is already photographing
the dead bodies littering the road.
So. How realistic is that?
Would you go out and shoot
pictures in a situation like that?
I photographed a suicide
bombing years ago.
Former Prime Minister of
Pakistan Benazir Bhutto
was assassinated by a suicide bomber
who also shot her with a pistol.
And I was very close to the vehicle
when that happened.
She was waving from
an open armored car and I saw
the panic in the drivers,
her driver's eye.
So I backed up and from the moment.
I noticed that problem where
I was about I don't know,
a couple yards away from
the vehicle to when the explosion
happened was only 10 seconds and
so and so I moved back and and
it saved me because I followed
some intuition and after
that explosion I was pushed
back in a in a Stampede.
But then I had the choice which
is the choice that you see in
the film of going in and continuing
working or just calling it a day and
and I made that choice to to go
in and photograph.
What I can see in the distance,
and so would I do that again today?
I'm not sure. And why is that?
Because as we've seen in in Ukraine,
we saw it in Syria,
we see it in in Gaza as well.
It's it's called the double tap.
When there is a bomb that comes
in or an air strike or a suicide
bombing, people like photojournalists
and 1st responders go in and
then the second one happens.
That's incredible. Can you share?
That's really incredible.
Can you share more episodes like
that? I'd really like
our viewers to know.
What risks you have taken?
So is there any moment that stands
out or you thought,
why the hell am I doing
this job now?
I would say when I was kidnapped
in Libya in 2011 during
the popular uprising, you know,
for about a week it was unclear
whether we would survive.
We were. I was taken hostage with
three colleagues from
the New York Times,
so Tyler Hicks, Anthony Shadid and
Steve Farrell.
Right. Sort of. At the moment of our
kidnapping, we were put on the ground
execution style, with each one of
us had a gun to our head and
they were about to execute us.
And I think in that moment,
I was pretty sure that I would
not survive.
And I didn't say in that moment
I would quit.
But I definitely asked myself, like,
wow, I really need to ask myself
why I'm here and like why I'm risking
my life because my family, you know,
I thought of my parents in
that moment, and I thought,
what will they think when they hear
their daughters been killed
in Ajdabiya, a place in Libya that
no one's ever heard of at the end of
that when we were finally released.
You know, ironically,
I never said I'm quitting.
I've been taking
prisoner a number of times.
I've had governments have
to negotiate for my release.
Any, any risky moment that stood
out? Not really, because there
have been so many different moments.
I've documented over 25 conflicts.
I worked in over 100 countries.
People often ask,
oh, where was the most dangerous?
What was the most close to this or
close to that I've been.
Very blessed, very lucky
not to have been injured,
obviously not to have been killed.
Many of my colleagues
have unfortunately suffered
the ultimate sacrifice and
these situations whether it could
be.
A bullet going by too closely,
shrapnel landing too closely.
All these different things that they
they are part of the risks that come
along depending on the situation.
Why do you take such risks? I mean,
I understand a soldier fighting
for his country, but why?
Why do you go to so many countries to
different wars and
different wars in many countries?
So why does one decide to risk
their life over and over again?
The interest and fascination and
violence and war,
it's it's you know that's one of
those things that that that I that
there I have no answer to like
objectively speaking I find
the interest strange.
A bit off putting. Kind of messed
up on some level, like
why be attracted and dedicate
my life to the very thing
that most people are trying
to get away from?
Why volunteer to do this thing?
Why do it over and over again?
Why do it for decades?
Why do it after friends die?
Why do it after being hurt?
Why do it after
like mentally being scarred?
It doesn't. It makes no sense.
So the answer to your question
is that I that I have no answer
because it makes no sense.
It's just it's who I am, you know
and and you have
to be who you are on some level.
But we would be remiss to not talk
about the fact that no international
journalists are allowed
to report from Gaza.
It is the only war in history
where fought by a democratic country
where journalists are not allowed in.
I think the statistics show
that journalists have been targeted
now more than ever.
I think. I think it's incredibly
important to talk about the fact that
journalists are also targeted with
impunity and no one ever gets taken
to task.
No one ever gets convicted
of killing a journalist.
Personally, I believe
it should be a war crime,
but I, you know, that's coming from
someone who's been kidnapped
twice and and you know,
and once by forces loyal to Gaddafi
when he was still in power.
Because they didn't like
our coverage. And that's really
important because a lot of
these journalists are being killed
because governments don't want
their coverage to get out.
And so I think that that's
very important to understand
why journalists are being killed,
because it's to censor
and it's to stop people from getting
coverage.
And Gaza, more journalists
have been killed than
any other war in history,
almost 100 journalists between
Gaza, Israel and Lebanon,
and a majority of them,
of course, in Gaza.
So it's important to talk about,
Yeah, we actually managed
to get in touch with someone there
to get their perspective.
Well, obviously not on the movie,
but on the general topics
we're covering here.
Let's just ask him if you can tell
me a bit about yourself, Mohammed,
where are you from?
Are you from Gaza? Or if not,
how did you end up there?
Are you safe? When I pick up a couple
of. Like in a Sabbath party.
Leila.
You you risk your life even more
to take these photos.
Why?
Say no. Men and Alfano Satosh.
It can fit us idea to Heiko Maserati
rule land Alfayoum Telrato machine
or washing hatta de la Habra.
Going back to the movie, in in
many distressing situations like
the suicide bombing, Lee looks
jaded and Carlos.
I feel like it's a bit like
the images they put on cigarette
packages with rotting
lungs and limbs and all the horrible
things that smoking
dust to your body.
First time they are horrifying,
but then, yeah,
they're still disgusting.
But you can't.
You get a little used to it.
So do you think
that that also happens
to your photos?
And do you think that happens
to you? Do you become callous?
This is a complicated question.
So it's a good one.
It's a good one. Yeah,
it is a good one.
You're asking very good questions,
actually, you know,
so for someone who's just discovered
the topic, you've done your research.
And. I don't feel.
I don't feel desensitized at all.
In a weird way, I feel more sensitive
than I used to.
I'm speaking for myself, you know,
maybe others.
Lindsay. Lindsay said the same,
by the way, earlier in my career,
anyhow, you know, I was, you know,
when I was in my early 20s.
I don't know how old you.
How old are you, by the way?
I'm 3232, OK? I mean, if you remember
being in your early 20s,
you know you're at least for me.
I was more wrapped up in myself,
my own ambitions,
my own insecurities.
There was a lot of noise inside
my head.
Getting in the way of honestly
confronting my emotions, We're also,
you know, men in a society
that doesn't always,
that often doesn't encourage
men to be honest with their emotions.
So you know the the passage of
so So in a weird way when
I was seeing more violence,
I was less sensitive to it because
of all the noise in my head now.
You know, thanks to thanks to time,
thanks to age, thanks to therapy,
thanks to, you know,
family, mind altering psychedelics,
thanks to family,
thanks to all sorts of things.
You know, I have to be honest about
what all the various qualities
that go into it.
I mean, I think, you know,
thanks to family, thanks to love,
thanks to friendship, you know,
all these things make
one much more sensitive.
And you know, ironically,
I don't know if that makes
me a better photographer on
some level.
Perhaps it makes
me a worse photographer
because I'm not.
I don't have the stamina
I used to have.
I don't have the I can't be.
As unflinching as that used to be,
I think that's one of
the things about
Civil War that I found
a little problematic because I felt,
I felt, you know,
I think Kirsten Dunst did a great
job of being a war photographer.
And look, there are a lot of
war photographers who are totally
stoic, but I personally could
not relate to her stoicism because
I'm a very emotional person.
I'm I'm the kind of person who feels
what I see and what I photograph.
And yes, I have the camera sort
of as a as a divider between
me and what's going on.
And I I continue to, you know,
do my work.
But I would say it's not to say
when I get in the car, when I get
home to edit, I'm not emotional.
I think that over time I have become
more sensitive to people
I photographed because in some cases
I see what happens
to them years later.
Right. I I, I not very often but
once in a while and and I realized
that these things that I document,
these little pieces of history
are just a moment for me and
my camera, sometimes much more than
that.
But for these folks it's it's
a change in their life that they'll
they'll never have again the life
that they had before and what comes
next will never be the same.
And I'm also thinking about things
which are kind of mundane to mention.
I'm thinking about
whether I have the thing in focus.
whether my camera got bumped,
the settings got bumped
and everything is under exposed.
I'm thinking about things like
that and that that keeps
us hyper focused in that moment.
And so when there's
a really emotional
traumatic situation happening,
usually it's not affecting
us then it affects us later on.
And in my personal case,
it's often when I'm editing
the photographs either
later that day or the next day.
What it's like?
Every time I survived a war song,
I thought I was sending
a warning home.
Don't do that.
But here we are. There's
a moment when Lee seems to have
an existential crisis,
despite all the photos of
all the horrors in other countries.
People don't seem to have learned
the lesson, and here they
are covering a civil war in the US.
So does Lee's resignation ring true?
Do you ever lose
faith in your photos?
Wish it were sufficient to end war.
But the forces that provoke
wars are not the same forces
that usually lead people to want
to document them, you know,
and there are many kinds of humans
out there, and all you need is.
A very, you know, a few powerful,
charismatic ones that want to create
their place in history or expand
their country's territories or
resources, and they can manipulate
enormous numbers of people.
So I I I don't think.
That photographs and evidence of
war on their own are ever enough
to end war.
Or they would have. I mean,
what more could we possibly need
to see to convince
us of the grotesqueness of it?
At a certain point,
how many pictures of guys shooting
at each other can you possibly take?
So but I do think it's important.
You know, we all play
our small role in society.
Ron, you covered 3 genocides.
Rwanda, Bosnia, the four.
So I'm wondering,
do you do you recognize
yourself in this scene?
I mean never again. Must sound like
a farce to you.
Is is it definitely an American,
but possibly more just Western
attitude that it's either
all or nothing?
If the work that we do doesn't stop
the war, doesn't stop
another war from happening.
Therefore the work has failed.
And yes, I think that's a legitimate
conversation to have,
but in reality based
on my own experiences with
my own work and having done this for
so long and seen the impact of
the work on.
On the audience.
But more specifically on
the people in the photographs,
or people that are related
to people in the photographs,
or foreign policy or other things
that the work can actually affect
change, but maybe not in the grand
way we want.
But I took, I took a photograph in
Darfur during the crisis there of
a young girl about
to go get firewood, risk her life.
Trying not to get to rape,
to get firewood,
for a family to cook food and so on.
And. And the photograph was used by
Amnesty International, by UNICEF
to raise money, to raise awareness,
and so on for programming for food,
other things that would go back to
Darfur.
Whether or not that specific girl was
ever directly helped as part of that,
I'm not sure I tried to find her.
I wasn't able to, but. The photograph
helped people, for example, during
the war, early days of the war in
Ukraine and in March of 2022,
when Putin was repeatedly saying
he would not target
civilians and that he was, you know,
only targeting combatants.
And. And then I was in a mortar
attack that almost killed
me and it killed
a family in front of me.
And and you know,
I made a photograph in that moment,
and the New York Times chose to run
that photograph on the front page.
And that photo was used not only by
the US ambassador to
the United Nations, but it was used.
Sort of worldwide to show that in
fact Russian troops were targeting
Ukrainian civilians because
it was a known
civilian evacuation route.
It didn't stop the war,
but it certainly brought
worldwide awareness and it certainly
brought brought more backing to
Ukraine and making
sure that Ukraine was getting
the weapons it needed to defend
itself.
And so I think,
I think we can affect policy.
I still believe that. Well,
there was a time,
years ago when I was covering
the Iraq war.
Goal was to educate
the public so that they could make,
they could make rational decisions
when they went to vote in
the next presidential election.
Well, as it turned out,
the Iraq War did not matter as much
to as Americans that as I thought
it would and and it didn't really
affect the election at all.
And so sometimes we have to realize
that what's important to us as
photojournalists in the field,
what's things that are so important
that we're willing to even risk
our lives.
Might not be important to others
back home.
Who? And that's that's a tough
thing to realize.
And and so ever since then I consider
it my goal not necessarily to change
the government policy,
although that would
be nice sometimes.
My goal really is to educate
folks on what's happened.
It's not. And it's not only about
change, right?
It's about keeping a record.
This is what other photographers
told me.
You're keeping a record. And with
that can come accountability.
Absolutely. I think
like when we we go back to let's say
go back to World War 2, go
back to the Holocaust,
when Churchill Roosevelt were asked
why didn't you bomb
the railroad tracks,
why didn't you do this to save
the Jews and so on.
The response was quite easy.
We didn't know,
so we didn't we didn't do it.
You Fast forward to Rwanda in
94 Bosnia the same time period with
President Clinton in
the United States helmet
Cole Mitterrand and so on.
CNN is going live. From Sarajevo.
The the day in,
day out of footage of of the of
the genocide in Rwanda,
people Kofi Annan couldn't say,
oh, we didn't know from
the UN It's like, yes, you did know.
You chose to ignore it and you need
to be held accountable for it.
No international journalists
are allowed in Gaza,
so your photos are essential
to document what's happening.
Do you think
they can also bring change?
Oh man.
My fellow Phil Otfal,
My fellow Finley, Sir.
My fellow film, Water in my fellow.
Help you folks just looking for
gas 300 for half a tank and two cans.
300 buys you a sandwich.
We got ham or cheese.
300 Canadian. OK, and
then what happens is that Jesse steps
out of the car and walks around
the corner and she seems attracted
by something horrific
she has glimpsed.
It's two men hanging from the wrists,
covered in blood and.
I want to ask something about
that attraction.
It's it's a very difficult question
to ask and maybe it's a bit offensive
and naive, but I'm going
to try anyway.
Here's the thing.
You take beautiful pictures of
horrible things.
Is there something attractive about
horror?
A bit. A bit like when there's
a car accident and you know
that there's traffic also because
people slow down when they pass by.
Because they want to look.
So is there something seducing
in horror?
I do think horror and beauty are much
closer to one another than we'd like
to think or imagine.
No, I absolutely agree.
I think my aesthetic
is very deliberate.
It's essentially it's it's
a seduction of using the aesthetics,
color, composition, light, to have
an emotional connection between
the viewer and the image.
Even if it's something
very difficult, because I want
you to not be able to look away and
then when you can't look away,
you understand the content.
People are dying
violent deaths all the time.
These violent deaths are are recorded
all the time, by film, by by
photographs, by eyewitnesses.
What is to distinguish
one death from another and using
the traffic accident thing
is perfect, right?
Like, oh, that could have been
me. Let's see,
let's see what happened.
Oh, maybe I can tell
what they did wrong.
So I don't do it wrong or just
this sort of fascination of
how what happens
when things go completely wrong.
And I think it's and the movie
too, right.
Like we are watching
apocalyptic movies.
Literally. Yeah. I think
exactly like this is.
And I think that this,
the film is in some ways, you know,
a bit of a warning for not just
the United States but for for
many countries on on what
could go wrong.
So I do try to make
pictures beautiful. Even when they're
in ghastly situations.
Now, granted, I try to I try
not to include gore in my pictures,
and I try to photograph
people in a way that's respectful
to them.
I don't want people to look look
ridiculous when they're in
a traumatic situation.
It's not my goal to to make them look
horrible or foolish or take
advantage of of their vulnerability.
And so yes, I want to make pictures
that are aesthetically pleasing,
otherwise people won't look at them.
And I also want to acknowledge
that it's very provincial of Maine
to sit here and complain about
modern spectators enjoying
violence as a spectacle,
because that violence is far from
me and I can choose to ignore it.
But that's a privilege and for
many people it's not the case.
And so I think it's important to flip
the perspective and ask.
What do the photographed think?
What do the people that suffer
this violence think?
Do they do they want their suffering
to be represented?
You're talking about
kind of armchair critics that have
basically 0 frame of reference or
what they're talking about making
broad sweeping commentaries with
a lot of self righteousness.
I mean that's that's a big part of
the culture in general about
many issues.
I mean I've never had a lot of regard
for people that shoot 1st and ask
questions later or people that speak
with authority about things they they
they do not know themselves.
So I, I, I honestly, you can hear
the. My voice.
But I also just tend to dismiss these
things out of hand because it's not,
it makes no sense to me.
You know, it's so easy to comment.
It just it's just too, you know,
I try to avoid commentary on things
that I I don't feel
confident about commenting on.
You know, it's, you know, it's like
the old Bob Dylan line.
You know, you better know
your song well before
you start singing.
So sounds like a good journalist.
Yeah, well, you know.
It's you try you know and a flawed
you know you're I make
plenty of mistakes I mean
this is the nature of things is being
honest with yourself about
what you can do and what you can and
who you are.
But but back to your question
you know you know I've had moments
where I've overstepped
boundaries and and and overstepped
people's privacy and they've
they've reacted negatively and of
course at that moment
you you you apologize you step
back you you you know you and
you feel bad about that.
I would say buy and I'd say that's
a lot more rare than people
might expect it expect
you know by and large I think
also if you're if you're being smart
and thoughtful and kind of kind and
respectful in your approach.
People tend to to want
to be photographed,
have these moments of pain because
the hope is that it then
has some meaning.
This like senseless,
horrific loss will somehow.
Means something other than
just the finality of death
and despair.
You know, I would,
I would feel that way.
The interaction between
the photojournalist and these folks
is really important because,
you know, anyone can imagine
someone they don't know comes with
an, comes in with a camera and starts
photographing without speaking
to them and they're in a moment of
distress.
Well, instead of that, go up and
talk to someone and say.
I can't believe what you're going
through today, and I'm very sorry.
I'm trying to document this so people
can understand what's happening.
If you don't mind, I'd like to stay
and you'll get a whole
different reaction.
And that's how the pros that I know
in this profession deal with
the folks that they're photographing.
It's not just running in and snapping
images, it's it's a lot more
sensitive and the people who have
longevity in this profession.
Are people who function in that way.
Hey. Out of interest.
I think that's a weird is like.
Pretty huge civil war going
on all across America, sure,
but we just try to stay out.
Stay out with what we see on
the news. Seems
like it's for the best.
Yeah, well let me know if you want
to try anything on.
Thanks. For a movie about
a civil war, it doesn't really
show many civilians.
Like there's a lot of
journalists and soldiers,
and but these people in this town
are a rare example of civilians,
and all they try to do is to ignore
the civil war.
And this reminds me of how a lot of
people today just don't want to see
any more news at all.
You know, we talk a lot about
news fatigue and news avoidance and
how people are tired of scrolling
their Instagram and finding among
videos of happy dogs and funny cats.
Suddenly another war image.
So are you afraid that that happens
to your work as well?
Look, I mean, I unfortunately,
I believe that it's important
for people to see what's happening
around the world especially,
you know, if if you know your country
or in the case of my country,
I'm American, contributes
to that war in some way, you know,
for sending troops, if we're sending
tax dollars, if we're sending
whatever I think.
Americans have a responsibility
to understand what's going
on in those places.
So I believe fundamentally in
the fact that even if this image
makes you uncomfortable,
you probably have to take
a look at what's happening.
So we saw this in Syria, 12 years of
war, people are like by by year #3,
it's like, OK, whatever,
more dead Syrians, whatever.
Now you're going.
Now you're starting to see it to some
extent with Gaza as we pass
six months, we already see it for
sure with Ukraine.
Oh, yeah, OK,
another city in Ukraine's bomb.
So, So what? That's not the right
attitude in my opinion.
I think it's it's very difficult,
but it's not the right attitude.
Like the the attitude should be like,
why are these things still happening?
It's human nature to turn away and
to turn a blind eye from
what's horrible.
I think so in that sense,
one of my jobs as a photojournalist
is to try to find a way to tell
a story in a way that maybe is not
overly graphic, that can convey
a story in a way that is sensitive,
that evokes emotion, but that doesn't
necessarily make you want.
To never read a newspaper again.
Is there any photo recently
that you think people should see?
There's the one of the mother
that just won World Press cradling
her child, I think.
And again, that's not too graphic.
And I think that's one of the reasons
why it spoke to so many people,
because you just see
the mother's pain.
In the machine.
Hey Michelle had been this one idea.
Saba ship then did.
The legend was a flare like
an Al Khatib in a nurse.
When it had the alarm be.
It's it's one of the unfortunate
aspects of the movie that,
at least in some scenes, it depicts
journalists as war junkies,
adrenaline junkies.
I'm thinking of when the veteran
writer smiles to the young
photographer while they're
being attacked by a helicopter.
That particular shot.
Yeah, that's right.
It's a bit perpetrating, don't
you find It can be.
And and I am a fan of the movie,
I like the movie.
I thought that Kirsten Dunst did
an incredible job.
As the veteran photographer in
in depicting some of the long term
issues that we face
psychologically after witnessing
so many things over time.
But. Of course the movie
has some issues.
I think that that the adrenaline
thing is is really and and
I think it's a little bit perpetuated
by movies like Civil War where
it's just like this constant
adrenaline rush through a war.
You know, I think that the,
the what we need to see is the quiet
time and the downtime and the toll
that that conflict takes
and and why we do it.
I'll say this, I don't have
any serious colleagues in
this profession who do
it for adrenaline.
That comes along with it, but
the but the but the.
But the problem is even bigger
because at the very end,
when the soldiers dragged
the president out of his desk,
the same journalist stops
them from shooting him and says
I need a quote.
He gets the quote and he then lets
them execute him.
Now the director Garland said
that he wanted journalists
to be the heroes of his movie.
I'm completely over,
completely over this.
Demonization and villainization of
the press.
It's been happening a lot.
Yeah, it it's it comes from
politicians and it comes from within
social media, which is this weird
public discourse space that doesn't
really relate to how people talk to
each other at all.
We all know that, right?
And and in some places it happens
within the press,
but whatever it is.
And it's very good that he talks
about this issue, but I'm not really
sure if he succeeded in the movie.
I mean, this is this,
I think, is a perfect example of
how journalists can turn people into
news items and dehumanize them.
This is the opposite of
good journalism.
This is the opposite of what
a good photo does.
I know I found,
I found it. Obviously I found
it very difficult and very,
very uncomfortable.
But to be honest with you,
I've been in that situation to
an extent several times.
Where unfortunately, that I was not
able to stop people.
From being executed and that was what
was going to happen and there's
nothing I could do.
And there were other times.
When I was able to say don't kill
these people and and either
my presence there with the camera,
my presence is a white westerner,
or my presence of actually
just saying.
Take them prisoners, which happened
one time in in Afghanistan in 2001
with the battle for Kabul
that they captured
two young Taliban soldiers and
they were going to kill them.
And I said no, don't kill them.
You should take their take
them prisoners and give them to
the Americans and the guys go,
OK, we're going to go do that.
And that was the science.
And then in Bosnia, I was with
militia and security,
unarmed civilians, right,
right in front of me, telling
me the whole time don't take
any photographs.
So. I did. I needed to document
what was obviously was a war crime
and the aftermath of the war crime
and the photographs were used as
evidence in the war crimes tribunal
to indict many people and help
convict them of of of war crimes.
But unfortunately at that moment and
nobody will ever know except for
the journalists themselves,
if you could have stopped
it or not stopped it.
I thought there was nothing
I could do and.
All I could do was make
sure that there was evidence of of,
of the crime.
I've never witnessed anything like
that, you know, You know,
you sometimes you see
bad behavior from other journalists,
photographers, you know, it's where
people are human or sometimes
they're being foolish,
sometimes they're being,
they've been at it too long.
I also can say that a lot of
my kind of colleagues and and and
friends in this profession
are amongst the most.
Thoughtful, honorable, courageous
people I've I've ever met.
You know, and and so. I tend
to not appreciate these caricatures.
You know,
I don't think they're accurate.
You would never have a journalist
asking someone to stop from
assassinating or killing
that person until they got a quote.
That person would would not be in
the business for very long.
So callous. I just need to quote
and then go ahead and kill him.
I don't care.
At the same time, I'm not.
I mean, I think if I was there,
obviously as a photographer,
I would have been doing
what what Jesse did.
But as a journalist,
I don't think I would have,
I don't know.
I don't think I would have asked.
I would have let, just let,
I would have said.
Maybe I would have said don't kill
him. I don't know.
I want to end by asking
why do you do what you do?
Francois Truffaut once said
that every movie against
war ends up being pro war.
And I don't know
if civil war succeeded
or not at being against war.
But one thing he shows,
I think, is that war is hell,
but it's also maybe
not attractive but addictive.
And there's a bit in your book where
you say we feel more comfortable in
the darkest places than we do back
home, where life seems
simple and too easy.
Can you talk about that? Yes.
When I was covering the wars in Iraq,
Afghanistan, Darfur, back-to-back
combat, you know,
I was literally flying from
one war to another and going
home basically where I was living
in Istanbul to do laundry.
And then I would get back on
the plane and go.
And so I felt at that time that
I could really only relate to people
who did similar work.
You know, for me, I felt
the most comfortable when I was not
necessarily in a war zone, but
surrounded by people who understood
what I had witnessed
and what I continue to witness.
And given that history, again,
often happens through conflict,
it's important that we are there
to document.
We are there to amplify
voices that need to be heard.
And as much of it is a cliche,
it is true to shine a light,
to remind people what's going
on they might not be paying
attention to, you know,
to me, you know, Are we just trying
to provoke emotion with our images?
Are we trying to also provoke
a certain amount of understanding?
You know, to me. Emotion is a is a is
a casual feeling.
It can be deep,
but it also can be fleeting.
You know, I I want to try and take
images and create works that have
a really sustained relationship
that that hopefully have, you know,
a deeper impact over time.
It's my job as a photojournalist
to keep them interested and
if they're turned off from the news,
maybe I'm not doing
my job well enough.
And so I I I take
that as a a personal challenge.
You have to look. At a familiar topic
in a different way.
And if you don't do that,
people will not pay attention,
no matter how strong
that picture is.
In Time and the Gelb in take
away Adam in Take a Picture.
Bashar. Al.
Mahadev. Came out. And NFC and Dabur.
With more 18 Zealand and Son with
more, I think
Zelena Black and not all.
I'm fast enough enough to laugh
though. Had a good Aqua.
Honey.